# Module 10

# Linked List
A linked list is like a train. You can add boxcars and train engines in any place you want. The pointer to next item in the linked list is like boxcar coupling. It connects the box cars together.

In this analogy, the train is the linked list, and the boxcar is the item in the linked list. The boxcar coupling is the pointer and the door between the boxcars is the list item accessibility. Conductor is the representative of where you are looking at in the train (linked list).

In  a singly linked list, you can only go from one item to another in one direction. Think of this like a train conductor going from box car to another but he can't go back to the box car he just came from because the doors are only one way. In fact the conductor doesn't know where he came from, because he's a forgetful fella. Conductor can only go from front to back. This doesn't happen in real life of course.

In a doubly linked list, you can go from front to back in both directions because each item in linked list has pointer to both item in front and item in back. In train analogy, the conductor starts at the front and can move to next car and back to the car he came from. Doors are two way.

Linked lists are handy if you need to insert items in between or remove items.

With an array, you would need to move lots of elements ‘to the right’ to make room for a new element in the middle or ‘to the left’ to fill the hole if you remove an element in the middle. That is: if you insist that the original order is maintained. Else you could add new elements to the end of a std::vector. Removing a value in the middle (if order doesn’t matter) can be done by overwriting it with the last element and then making the vector one smaller. That would still have complexity O(1), constant time. Note: you may have to delete the element that is removed or free it. The latter is uncommon, cause then you would mix C style malloc with C++ STL.

Linked lists are often sorted in some way and you want to maintain the proper order at all times. Although they allow for fast removal and insertion, they have poor cache performance due to poor space locality: all nodes can be ‘anywhere’ in memory, they are not at neat consecutive locations. Also, the pointers to the next node (and previous node in case of double linked list) take extra memory. Thus for small lists it is better to use a std::vector or an array. Perhaps you can first build the vector or array and sort when you are done adding all items.

Use Cases:
Image viewer – Previous and next images are linked, hence can be accessed by next and previous button.

Previous and next page in web browser – We can access previous and next url searched in web browser by pressing back and next button since, they are linked as linked list.

Music Player – Songs in music player are linked to previous and next song. you can play songs either from starting or ending of the list.
# Binary Trees
I have a random number, in the range of 1 to 25. You try to determine what's my number in the least number of guesses. Whenever you take a guess, I'll tell you if my number is higher or lower.

The trick is always pick the number half way between the possible range. Example
my number is 5.
(0th step) 13 - lower
(1th step) 6 - lower
(2th step) 3 - higher
(3rd step) 4 - higher
(4th step) 5 - correct!

Through this method, the maximum amount of steps you need to take to get to the answer is given by RoundDown( Log2(N) ). In this case N is 25 so Log2(25) = 4.64, rounding down gives 4 steps maximum.

Given the Log function, the efficiency of this algorithm increases as N gets larger.

Log2(1000) = 9.97
Log2(10000) = 13.29 (only 13 guesses needed to guess the correct answer!)

Binary Search Trees works off the same logic, nodes are arranged such that smaller nodes are always to the left of the current node.


Here we have a BST of with 15 nodes. Looking for 5;

5 < 8 go left
5 > 4 go right
5 < 6 go left

Of course, this works for not just numbers, anything that can be sorted can be represented this way.

# Visualizations
Linked List
- https://www.cs.usfca.edu/~galles/visualization/StackLL.html
- https://visualgo.net/en/list?slide=1

Breadth-First Search (Queue)
- http://yanhan.github.io/bfsvis/
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QRq6p9s8NVg

Depth-First Search (Stack)
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iaBEKo5sM7w

Binary Search Tree
- https://www.cs.usfca.edu/~galles/visualization/BST.html


# Muddiest Points

## Could we (as a class, not as an explanation) live-code a depth-first search on a Binary Search Tree - I see that we did graphs and this is one of the two major algorithms used on graphs (and arguably one of the harder ones to understand)?
Graph:
```
// create a graph class
class Graph {
	// defining vertex array and
	// adjacent list
	constructor(noOfVertices)
	{
		this.noOfVertices = noOfVertices;
		this.AdjList = new Map();
	}

	// functions to be implemented

  // addVertex(v)
  // add vertex to the graph
  addVertex(v)
  {
    // initialize the adjacent list with a
    // null array
    this.AdjList.set(v, []);
  }

  // addEdge(v, w)
  // add edge to the graph
  addEdge(v, w)
  {
    // get the list for vertex v and put the
    // vertex w denoting edge between v and w
    this.AdjList.get(v).push(w);

    // Since graph is undirected,
    // add an edge from w to v also
    this.AdjList.get(w).push(v);
  }

	// printGraph()
  // Prints the vertex and adjacency list
  printGraph()
  {
    // get all the vertices
    var get_keys = this.AdjList.keys();

    // iterate over the vertices
    for (var i of get_keys)
    {
        // great the corresponding adjacency list
        // for the vertex
        var get_values = this.AdjList.get(i);
        var conc = "";

        // iterate over the adjacency list
        // concatenate the values into a string
        for (var j of get_values)
          conc += j + " ";

        // print the vertex and its adjacency list
        console.log(i + " -> " + conc);
      }
    }

	// bfs(v)
  // dfs(v)
  // Main DFS method
  dfs(startingNode)
  {

      var visited = [];
      for (var i = 0; i < this.noOfVertices; i++)
          visited[i] = false;

      this.DFSUtil(startingNode, visited);
  }

  // Recursive function which process and explore
  // all the adjacent vertex of the vertex with which it is called
  DFSUtil(vert, visited)
  {
      visited[vert] = true;
      console.log(vert);

      var get_neighbours = this.AdjList.get(vert);

      for (var i in get_neighbours) {
          var get_elem = get_neighbours[i];
          if (!visited[get_elem])
              this.DFSUtil(get_elem, visited);
      }
  }
}

// Using the above implemented graph class
var g = new Graph(6);
var vertices = [ 'A', 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E', 'F' ];

// adding vertices
for (var i = 0; i < vertices.length; i++) {
	g.addVertex(vertices[i]);
}

// adding edges
g.addEdge('A', 'B');
g.addEdge('A', 'D');
g.addEdge('A', 'E');
g.addEdge('B', 'C');
g.addEdge('D', 'E');
g.addEdge('E', 'F');
g.addEdge('E', 'C');
g.addEdge('C', 'F');

// prints all vertex and
// its adjacency list
// A -> B D E
// B -> A C
// C -> B E F
// D -> A E
// E -> A D F C
// F -> E C
g.printGraph();
```
- https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/implementation-graph-javascript/

DFS on Binary Tree
```
function Node(val){
  this.value = val;
  this.left = null;
  this.right = null;
}

function BinarySearchTree(){
  this.root = null;
}

BinarySearchTree.prototype.push = function(val){
  var root = this.root;

  if(!root){
     this.root = new Node(val);
     return;
  }

  var currentNode = root;
  var newNode = new Node(val);

  while(currentNode){
     if(val < currentNode.value){
         if(!currentNode.left){
            currentNode.left = newNode;
            break;
         }
         else{
            currentNode = currentNode.left;
       }
    }
    else{
        if(!currentNode.right){
           currentNode.right = newNode;
           break;
        }
        else{
           currentNode = currentNode.right;
        }
    }
 }

}


function dfs(node){
  if(node){
    console.log(node.value);
    dfs(node.left);
    dfs(node.right);
  }
}
function inorder(node){
  if(node){
    inorder(node.left);
    console.log(node.value);
    inorder(node.right);
  }
}

var bst = new BinarySearchTree();
bst.push(3);
bst.push(2);
bst.push(4);
bst.push(1);
bst.push(5);
console.log(bst);
```

## I need to review linked lists and binary search trees. I got one difficult question for each during my University of Washington Masters of Science in Technology Innovation interview and didn't do well. Does this work similarly in JavaScript as Java and Python?

## still trying to figure out the catch and try code blocks, is either of them used strictly for debugging.

# Answers from Kevin Chen

## So are heaps the same data-structure as trees however with sorted values in them. The book says that a heap is  ” is a type of tree-like data structure in which the parent is bigger than its children”. Is is tree-like or is it a tree?

To my knowledge, heaps are conceptually a type of binary trees.  Therefore, they can of course be implemented as binary trees, but usually are just implemented as arrays.  The one mentioned in the quote is max-heap.

## Muddiest point: Binary Heap Array Index Structure.

## Can a tree be considered binary if it is a network?
No, a binary tree is a tree.  A network is not always a tree... ...but you can build your network just like a binary tree if you want to.

## how important is it to know that all these tress exist?
It’s used everywhere.  It’s used in searching, AI, and many other things. Binary search trees are trees, Decision trees are trees, Tries are trees.  They can help speed up algorithms you’re using.

## why do we need linked list?
To make your life easier when you want to go from an element to another element in the dataset.

## Are there any better graph-searches than BFS, DFS, A* or Dijkstra’s?
It depends on the situations.  Even these algorithms have many different variations and implementations that have different time complexity and use case.  A simple example will be Dijkstra’s can be sped up with min-heap comparing to a naive one, but both are called Dijkstra’s.  Another example is, when we have negative edges, Dijkstra’s won’t do the work.  In this case, Bellman-Ford can do the job.  This stands the same if you refer to A*.  BFS and DFS are even more general terms.

## In reading the text regarding the various trees, I found the examples and code in the text helpful in understanding the concept. I believe it would be interesting to see additional examples and best ways to apply them.
Examples: (Some can be kind of complicated, you may decide what you want to use) Binary search trees, tries, red-black trees, minimum spanning trees, heaps, Huffman coding, and so on.

# Articles
- https://medium.com/@efelleke/analogies-and-code-4058b599a7ae
- https://www.quora.com/How-do-you-explain-linked-lists-in-laymans-terms
- https://www.quora.com/Whats-the-best-analogy-to-explain-binary-search-trees-to-a-layman
- https://www.quora.com/When-would-you-use-a-linked-list
- https://rschu.me/list-a-directory-with-tree-command-on-mac-os-x-3b2d4c4a4827
- https://study.com/academy/lesson/binary-trees-applications-implementation.html
- https://www.cs.bu.edu/teaching/c/tree/breadth-first/
